Of preparing for a performance,
of a typical performance, what
was the hardest part of the Aggie band halftime to
prepare for? I think putting the music with the
drill. In other words, you learn the drill, And
you've got everything. You count the number of
steps in the drill. Then you count the number of
measures in the music. And you get everything all
set for the grand finale. And then this means that
you have to cut some of the music off. And getting
everybody to cut it off at exactly the same time so
it will fit the music. I think that was probably the
hardest part. And like I say, Wednesday was a bad
day because it took so many times to go over it until
they... they got it and probably half as many times
as it would have taken any other group but even as
smart and determined and dedicated as these guys
were we still had some trouble with that but after
usually after about Thursday or Friday then you
see it all fit in together and by Friday and then
Saturday morning it was usually they would just
something about that audience and getting the 50
60 000 people whatever we have and getting them all
together they just really outdid themselves all
right let's make believe that on this
hypothetical situation it's a comparatively
clear day saturday we've got a home game describe
what that day was for you and the band when did
things begin and so forth The typical Saturday day
at home would begin for me about 5, 5 30. I'd have to
be up there at 6 30, 6 45 in the morning. At 6 45 when
you get there, all of them will be there except
maybe a few seniors who haven't gotten up yet.
They're in section and the drums are over there
playing the cadence and they're walking up and
down practicing their counter marches. The drum
majors are usually down on the goal line or
somewhere, there's some part of the drill that
they're just not quite sure about. They're over
there working on that. At 7 o'clock we take a break
and we go through the drill sometime. If they do it
real good, we go through it twice. at 7. If it's not
real good, we stay sometime until 7.45. But if it's
some of the cross through sometime would give us
trouble. But then usually after we get through
with that, well then we depart and we go. They'll
have on their fatigues and they'll go get on their
uniforms and we get ready to go. But now you know
they have the march in over there. That would begin
about two hours before the game started. I had to be
there so I could meet them. Then we'd have them,
we'd have the march in and then we'd have the
pregame and then we'd have the game. So you're
talking say the game started two o'clock you're
talking getting up at 5 5 30 in the morning and
getting home at 7 6 37 and it's a it's a full day it's a
full day for them and uh I don't I thought many times
what in the world makes them do this and I think it's
uh dedication and pride and and uh The love for the
band and their devotion to each other is the only
things that I have come up with as to why they do
this. There were no scholarships. There were no
pay. No pay involved. And they do it year after year
after year. And whatever the demand is on their
time, well, then they do it. And I think those
things have to enter into it. I haven't been able to
figure out, what in the world are they doing this
for? And that's the reason. There's just an
undying interest in what they're doing and
devotion there that I have never seen in another
group Anywhere, not just the bandsmen, but the
Aggie band has had a lot of still does, had a lot of
fine qualities, and few people really understand
this unless they have been in it. As you think back
over the years that you were the director, what
were some of the proudest moments in terms of
performances? Were there any that you
particularly... There is one that particularly
stands out in my mind. We went to the Cotton Bowl in
1986, I believe, or 1987, and we played Ohio State
University. Ohio State, without a doubt, has one
of the finest bands in this world, marching bands.
And they're all brass, and most of them are music
majors, and they really know what, they are just
superb. So I was really looking forward to this,
and perhaps a little apprehensive because we have
no music majors, we have no, what you would call,
usually the only playing that most of these guys
get was in the band. So we go up there on the morning
before the Cotton Bowl performance and we get so
many minutes on the field and the Ohio band goes
first. and uh we go up in the stands to watch and I
told all the guys in the band to go up and watch them
and so they they come they come on the field and they
just do an absolutely marvelous job and they they
end their drill with coming over to the side and
playing climb every mountain and it just it just
was so pretty it scared me to death so anyway we went
down to the end and Gathered around, as we always
do, and I told him, I said, now, guys, I want to tell
you something. I told you that I would take you
anywhere in the United States on any regulation
football field, and I would put you up against any
band in the world for marching and playing, and
you'll do good. I said, now, this is the time to do a
little bit better than you know how to do. And so we
come out there and they just really did
beautifully at the rehearsal. And we had a tune or a
march, a kind of a symphonic march that I had
arranged for them at the end called Cowbaccade,
which is a very dramatic ending. And we also came to
the side like we did
quite often. And they played this thing about as
pretty as anything I ever heard. And so when we got
through and we did it again, I went up in the top and
and their band directors were sitting up there as
to this day they had done nothing more than say um
hello how are you I'm so-and-so I'm so-and-so and
this one old kind of short stocky kind of
bald-headed guy came over there and he said my name
is Mr. is Dr. so-and-so and I didn't know who he was
he said I am the retired director of the Ohio State
band and said for years now I've been hearing how
fine this band was and said they are better than I
thought they were that I heard they were and so you
know that that just made my day so for some reason or
other the the Aggie band and the Ohio State band
seemed to have a lot in common and they were trading
spats for epaulettes and they were mixing and
talking and And so that day at that cotton bowl,
that's two of the finest bands I have ever seen. And
they were just flawless. We did a beautiful deal
where we spread out for a hundred yards and just a
beautiful drill. And they were, they were, they
were, they were fantastic. And so then when, even
when we were leaving on the buses after this was
over, when they were still talking and saying
goodbye and they were writing each other when we
got back in. So that musically speaking, I think
that was probably the, One of the highlights of my
performance, I don't know of anything I ever
enjoyed better. All right, let's go to the other
extreme. Somewhere, something went wrong. Yeah.
We had one of those. Well, we had several where they
went wrong, but this one deal, we went to Rice, I
believe, in maybe 80 or 81. And Rice is just like
going to another planet, really. They have no
earthly desire to see you excel. They just want to
mess you up if they can. They'd thrown smoke bombs
into the band one year and burned a couple of them,
burned their boots. They had that clown running
around out there on the field running through them
and everything. But this year it was whistles.
They had probably 150, 200 whistles. And we had a
very difficult, really had a nice drill all worked
out. everything was going real good until we got it
all they started blowing these whistles right in
the middle of the field and one half of the bugle
rank turned five yards too soon and uh they of
course by the time then the other half took six
steps they were already ten steps apart And it was
one of those deals where we would spread out all
over the field and we did what we called a rocket and
we had a step one drill where we picked up and then we
made the tee. Well, there was no way in this world
they could get back together. And we had been
trying for years things on a football field that I
had never seen anybody else try or do. And I just had
wondered, said, these guys are not
wind-up people. They're wind-up machines.
They're people. They're going to make mistakes.
And I was just wondering when this, hope it didn't,
but if it's ever going to happen. Well, it
happened. And when they came, everything looked
pretty good until they came back to Farmington and
they couldn't do it. Because one group was 10 or 15
yards down there and they couldn't stop. So they
just left. Well, a lot of Aggies thought that,
well, this is just terrible. This is the end of the
world. Of course, you can imagine how I felt and how
all the guys in the band felt. and they made the
Houston papers and the coaches were saying oh my
goodness the band director was crying well they
didn't even see me they don't know what they're
talking about but it was a it was bad and they made
but they just simply made a mistake a bad one and
there's nothing they can do about it so you know
humans make mistakes so anyway we went on in the
next week I don't remember who we played But that
was probably one of the best drills I've ever seen.
It was step-by-step. It was absolutely as perfect
as you could ever get it. But a lot of the people just
remember that, and they don't remember the good
things. And I don't know of anybody in this world at
one time or other that hadn't made a real bad
mistake. So anyway, we did that. That's about the
only time I can ever remember. But it's something
that I'm sure a lot of people, and of course I was
reminded of it for, weeks after that everywhere I
went about the blunder. What about weather? You
must have encountered some astonishing weather
conditions somewhere. We have marched on Kyle
Field when it snowed, when there was snow on the
field. We have marched at the halftime whether
it's rain, mud, sleet. or snow and we marched a
number of times at the Baylor game at Kyle Field
when the Baylor band wouldn't even march. And they
were in the buses and we were out there marching. We
went to Arkansas one time and it was so cold that we
couldn't even move the valves on the horns. Those
guys are pretty tough and it didn't really bother
them much. They just did what they had to do. That
was the story of their life. They did what they had
to do and wherever it was very little griping and
fussing and complaining to anybody about
anything so it you know it was a it's like a second
dedication pride uh and that that that has a lot to
do with it did uh the different head football
coaches uh express appreciation for the band's
efforts we had we had i think marvelous rapport
with the football coaches and the athletic
directors and I moved here about the same day or the
same week that Emory Ballard and R.C. Slocum moved
here in 1972 and we were really dear friends the
coaches kind of adopted me and they took me fishing
with them and they took me on all these golf
excursions and fundraising things which I dearly
loved and then Jackie Sherrill was he was really
really good to us and he came over would eat with us
and he came to band hall on several different
occasions and wanted to see everything and and
then uh of course rc we hunted together honey quail
together golf together and uh we were we were very
close friends so I don't know how the relationship
could have been any better. And, of course, with
Wally Groff, he was not the athletic director
then, but he was in charge of the money. And, you
know, that can get pretty tight sometimes. And
Wally and I don't ever recall having a problem that
we couldn't work out. And so I just was so pleased
with our, well, you know, you can brawl it or fry it,
but if it were not for those football games, and the
athletic contest. I doubt very seriously we'd
have an Aggie band. Oh I agree. And you know you can
play all the concerts in the world on all the
concert stages and there's nowhere in the world
60-70,000 people gonna see you every Saturday
unless you get out there in March. And I've always
felt that way about high school and certainly in
college. The Aggie band makes their reputation on
the football field. So those lines better be
straight and that drill better be good because if
it's not, that's where you're going to lose it to.
And so it's been a great thing. Of the other bands in
this region of the country, Which ones do you
respect the most? Well, in the Southwest
Conference, I feel that I think my second choice is
Texas Tech. I think they have a wonderful band. And
I think they're... They not only march well, they
play beautifully, and they're usually very
cordial to us. Texas University has a good band,
and I appreciate them. I've always felt like the
SMU band was a very true art form band. No one else
did what they did, and no one else did what we did, so
you could possibly say that we were the only two
originals around. I feel man for man I think they
probably got more sound I don't think it's so much
that way anymore but man for man they were just
absolutely blow the end out of those things but
Texas Tech I've always enjoyed them and I think
next to the Aggie band they would probably be my
favorite and of course otherwise Ohio State is
probably right up on the list Michigan has a great
band and there's so many real real fine ones but you
know I really didn't have a whole lot of time to
think about how good anybody else was I never ever
recall when we're getting set to play somebody
that we ever mentioned who we were playing And I do
have heard that down at the Texas band, when Mr.
Donino, Dr. Vincent Donino was there, he was a very
dear friend of mine, said, well, all year long now,
we've just been playing. Now, this week, we've got
a march. The Aggies are coming. You got to get those
lines straight, and you got to do something. Now,
he told me this. So, you know, it's just
a matter of taste, I think. Some people
probably... Now, all members of the band were in
the Corps. Right. Compared to the other Corps
members, were there more contracts, more DNC in
the band than in the rest of the Corps, or was it just
about the same? Well, I think it's about the same.
We had a lot of folks that were in the corps just to be
in the band and they were not interested in in
contracts and were became dnc's but there were a
lot of them in the other part of the corps the corps
would have a difficult time existing without
their dnc's but i think the the the band always had
their share of the of the uh of the the uh uh
contracts and also we had a very extensive program
for improving our grade system, and our grades
were really very high in the band. I was going to
say, compared to the rest of the Corps, weren't
band grades higher? They were higher, especially
A Company. They would get the academic, it seemed
like almost every year, they would get the
academic
flag
when they had the award ceremonies. They would win
that almost every year. How likely was a freshman
in the band to be able to march at halftime the first
year? We had a rotation system, and we tried our
best, unless they just did not have problems of
some kind, that no freshman would miss more than
one game. And we kept up with it every week, and we'd
have them over on the side, And then we tried to fix
that. Now sometime it was, some of them would have
to miss more than one, but every week you have
people that are hurt, you have people that are
sick, and it's necessary to use those alternates
in there. So it was really good to have a large group
And I didn't care how many we had, I didn't want to
march for 303, because you could not do, with more
than that, it's very difficult to do anything.
It's just really pretty. 303. That's 300 plus the
three drum majors, yeah. And that's 25 plus 12, I
believe, if I remember right. That's been a long
time. But anyway. And in terms of their...
military relation you had both Air Force Army and
Navy Marines Navy and Marines just like the rest
that's right we had all four about were they
similar to the Corps in terms of the percentage
that lived on campus compared to the
percentage... Well, they had to have special
permission to live off campus. It had to be
extenuating circumstances. Even if they were
juniors and seniors? Even if they were juniors and
seniors, they had to live. They had to live,
whether they were married They had a hardship
case, had to live with their grandmother and Brian
or something like that. But they had to live in dorm
9, dorm 11. That's where we had ours. And so we,
what's so wonderful about that, you can usually
find them. If you don't, they're not in their room,
just leave a note and tell them to come in and see
you. And that's, it's one of the most, it's the
finest setup for a van I believe I ever saw. Can you
describe, please, the process for selecting drum
majors? We have a committee, and you have one from
each class, plus the present drum majors, plus the
COs, and I was the head of the committee, and we
would have two days of grueling
things for them to do in other words they would have
to go inside and direct the national anthem they
would have to direct the spirit each one of them
then we would have to go outside and they would have
to take them through a drill and have to hear their
verbal commands and we'll have to see their baton
work and then we would go inside and we would go
right down the list of just about everything
whether they change their shorts every day or
their socks or what they knew it and we would
discuss each one about leadership qualities and
personal qualities and leadership how
meaningful that is to them and whether they're a
team player or a hot dog or And it's quite grueling,
and I can only think of one time that I had to break
the tie. And to be honest with you, the band
directors would always pick theirs just like
anybody else. And sometimes I wouldn't get any of
the top three that they'd pick, and we'd just vote
on it, see? And we'd talk about it and put them on the
board, and they usually worked out pretty good.
All three had to be seniors? have to be seniors then
they picked they picked three in an alternate and
uh one year we had to use an alternate and we had twin
drum majors the twin uh one of the twins made it the
other one was the alternate and when this guy left
and so we we had we had two you couldn't tell them
apart and uh And let's see, now I think I've heard
the term band commander. Yes, he's appointed by
the, we recommend him, I recommend him. But he's
not the drill major. No, no. He's the ROTC. He is the
band commander and he's the ROTC. He's appointed
by the commandant. And they do let me recommend
him, and then he's appointed by the commandant. In
terms of prestige... there was keener
competition for which? To be band commander?
Well, the band commander is supposedly the
highest, he's the highest officer in there, but
prestige-wise, in my opinion, the drum major's
got, they got all the glory, and he got all the work,
because they were out there in front, and the head
drum major, of course, was the one that does the
recall step-off on hullabaloo, and they liked to
make a big deal out of that. One guy cracked a
vertebra in his neck one day shaking his head for
the We call him Mooney's, and he cracked a burger
right back there. Had to wear a little old brace,
one of the head gun major. I said, well, see there,
if you just go ahead and say it quicker than that, it
wouldn't happen to you. When you arrived, let's
talk about the personnel. When you arrived, were
there any minority members of the band, Hispanic?
Yes, we had several of those.
We had several Hispanics and several, we had some
people from New York and we didn't have any black
folks. Didn't have any black folks? No, no. Any
international band members? We had some from
Panama. Really? And we would get several of those
every year from some country. I had one from
Iroquois maybe? Do you remember, you said there
was no black member of the band when you came? No.
But after that we had- When do you remember? Can you
describe how that worked? Well, we had probably,
you know, every year we took some if they signed up,
but I don't remember when we had the first one. Do
you remember any difficulties, any incidents at
all? No. Oh, no. No, we never had any. One of them,
the last year I was there we had a black drum major.
And he was killed about two weeks ago, or about two
months ago, a month ago, in a plane crash. He had
applied for a commission and I wrote several
letters from him and he got the commission but then
they wouldn't let him fly because of some kind of
eye problem or something and then he was flying for
the Civil Air Patrol and his plane crashed. See, I
believe that this school's record on black-white
relations has always been splendid. Oh, I think
it's wonderful. We never had a menish problem. I
tell people, as an observer, that I have the
impression the key thing was not who your parents
were, but are you an Aggie or you're not an Aggie?
Absolutely. It doesn't make any difference about
that other. Not to me, it doesn't. All right, now
let's go to the admission of women in the band. When
did anybody first contact you about? Well do you
remember the Zentgraft deal? Yes I do. Do you
remember the Zentgraft? Originally she was
challenging the Color Guard and she was
challenging the Ross Volunteers as the
organization. She was not in the band. So she just
threw in the ban as an afterthought. And then she
entered that into her deal because we didn't have
any. So did she ever come to talk to you about doing
the ban? No, she never even been in the ban hall. I
wonder if she even was a... She was upset because
they wouldn't take her in the color guard, I
believe. And so anyway, then when they went to the
judge, And we were interviewed by, I could see the
writing on the wall, just to be perfectly honest
with you. And I told them the first day, I said, hey,
we're not gonna win this. Why don't we just go ahead
and do it? And let us have the $200,000 you're going
to spend on this thing, and we'll buy something we
really need with it. Oh, no, no, no, we've got to
fight. Well, anyway, this went on for five years.
And people would, and I said, hey, look, do you
think for a minute now in Washington, D.C., they
can say, they have such a good band, let's just
leave it all male because they'll be the only one
then that doesn't have it. It's not going to work
that way. And then I didn't say anymore. But
anyway, it was quite hush-hush, and I was not
allowed to talk about it. And I said, if you'll just
let us do it, we'll do it in no time. But we had a press
conference over there. There was a
representative from every major radio station
and TV station in the country, and we took five of
them in. And... And what year was that? I'm not real
sure. I think it was Haskell, I'm not real sure. It
may be in that book over there. It was in the 80s. I
think it was in the 85 or 80s, somewhere along in
there. And the first one that came in there was a
girl about 6'2", and she was an all-state trombone
player, and she was an athlete, very nice looking.
And she still writes me. And she was the first one,
she was the only one there, she was the first one to
graduate. Now, within the typical band member,
how did they react? They were all going to quit. And
this presented a problem. And they came in and
said, we're not going to stay, we're going to quit.
I said, now, wait a minute. So I talked to John,
Johnny and I talked about it a lot. John Colas. John
Colas. And I said, Johnny, I want to find out one
thing from you right quick before we go on here now.
If they all quit like they say they are, which I
think we can handle that, are we still going to have
a ban? He said, we will have a ban if they quit. So I go
back to him and I say, now, gentlemen, I want to tell
you something. If you all quit, and boy, I mean they
were 100%. If you quit like you say they are, then
the Aggie ban is through. It's done. It's
finished. Now, if you want to continue to have the
Aggie Band with a few exceptions, you'll stay. But
I have talked to the Vice President of Student
Services, and he very confidently told me that
they will have a band here whether you quit or not.
Now, I'm asking you not to quit. Don't let four or
five women ruin this organization. Said girls
have been, said, I don't want girls in this band,
but I love girls. I've been married to one for 42
years. And they are not going to hurt us like you
think they will. Well, they didn't say anything.
Just looked and stared, glassy. So they came back,
C.O. came back and said, sir, we're going to try it.
I said, that's fine, because they're going to have
a band, and I'm going to stay here, and I can go
somewhere else or whatever, but I'm going to stay.
And I think we ought to stay and do it. And they will
wear the same things that you wear. They will have
their hair. That was the main thing they were
concerned about. They wanted them to look.